README for Edition 1.03 of the Emacs Lisp Reference Manual.
This is the second release of Edition 1.03; the text is unchanged from
the first release, but bugs in Makeinfo have been fixed, and the info
file has been corrected.

Richard Stallman
28 January 1991

* This directory contains the texinfo source files for the Reference
Manual, make-permuted-index, and the latest version of texinfo.tex,
which handles forms that cannot be handled by the older versions of
texinfo.tex.  Also, it contains makeinfo.c.

* The Emacs Lisp Reference Manual is turning out bigger than we
expected.  It totals over 550 pages when printed on 8.5 by 11 inch
paper and the unsplit Info file is just under a megabyte.

* You can format this manual either for Info or for printing hardcopy
using TeX.  

** This distribution contains a Makefile that you can use with GNU Make.
Otherwise, here are detailed instructions:

** HARDCOPY: A copy of the version of `texinfo.tex' that formats this
manual is included in this distribution.

The master file for formatting this manual for Tex is called
`elisp.texi'.  It contains @include commands to include all the
chapters that make up the manual.  In addition, `elisp.texi' has
the title page in a new format designed by Karl Berry, using the
@titlespec command.

To create a DVI file with a sorted index, execute the following
commands in the shell:

% tex elisp.texi
% texindex elisp.??
% tex elisp.texi

*** To create a DVI file with a permuted index, you may experiment
with `make-permuted-index'.  

** INFO: A copy of makeinfo.c that will format this manual for Info is
included in this distribution.  This program is written in C and can
be used separately from Emacs.  `makeinfo' produces much better error
messages than the old `texinfo-format-buffer'.  You can run `makeinfo'
it on the `elisp.texi' file.
