This is Info file elisp, produced by Makeinfo-1.63 from the input file
elisp.texi.

   This version is the edition 2.4b of the GNU Emacs Lisp Reference
Manual.  It corresponds to Emacs Version 19.34.

   Published by the Free Software Foundation 59 Temple Place, Suite 330
Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA

   Copyright (C) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996 Free Software
Foundation, Inc.

   Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

   Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
translation approved by the Foundation.

   Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
that the section entitled "GNU General Public License" is included
exactly as in the original, and provided that the entire resulting
derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission notice
identical to this one.

   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that the section entitled "GNU General Public License"
may be included in a translation approved by the Free Software
Foundation instead of in the original English.


File: elisp,  Node: Near Point,  Next: Buffer Contents,  Up: Text

Examining Text Near Point
=========================

   Many functions are provided to look at the characters around point.
Several simple functions are described here.  See also `looking-at' in
*Note Regexp Search::.

 - Function: char-after POSITION
     This function returns the character in the current buffer at (i.e.,
     immediately after) position POSITION.  If POSITION is out of range
     for this purpose, either before the beginning of the buffer, or at
     or beyond the end, then the value is `nil'.

     In the following example, assume that the first character in the
     buffer is `@':

          (char-to-string (char-after 1))
               => "@"

 - Function: following-char
     This function returns the character following point in the current
     buffer.  This is similar to `(char-after (point))'.  However, if
     point is at the end of the buffer, then `following-char' returns 0.

     Remember that point is always between characters, and the terminal
     cursor normally appears over the character following point.
     Therefore, the character returned by `following-char' is the
     character the cursor is over.

     In this example, point is between the `a' and the `c'.

          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------
          Gentlemen may cry ``Pea-!-ce! Peace!,''
          but there is no peace.
          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------
          
          (char-to-string (preceding-char))
               => "a"
          (char-to-string (following-char))
               => "c"

 - Function: preceding-char
     This function returns the character preceding point in the current
     buffer.  See above, under `following-char', for an example.  If
     point is at the beginning of the buffer, `preceding-char' returns
     0.

 - Function: bobp
     This function returns `t' if point is at the beginning of the
     buffer.  If narrowing is in effect, this means the beginning of the
     accessible portion of the text.  See also `point-min' in *Note
     Point::.

 - Function: eobp
     This function returns `t' if point is at the end of the buffer.
     If narrowing is in effect, this means the end of accessible
     portion of the text.  See also `point-max' in *Note Point::.

 - Function: bolp
     This function returns `t' if point is at the beginning of a line.
     *Note Text Lines::.  The beginning of the buffer (or its accessible
     portion) always counts as the beginning of a line.

 - Function: eolp
     This function returns `t' if point is at the end of a line.  The
     end of the buffer (or of its accessible portion) is always
     considered the end of a line.


File: elisp,  Node: Buffer Contents,  Next: Comparing Text,  Prev: Near Point,  Up: Text

Examining Buffer Contents
=========================

   This section describes two functions that allow a Lisp program to
convert any portion of the text in the buffer into a string.

 - Function: buffer-substring START END
     This function returns a string containing a copy of the text of the
     region defined by positions START and END in the current buffer.
     If the arguments are not positions in the accessible portion of
     the buffer, `buffer-substring' signals an `args-out-of-range'
     error.

     It is not necessary for START to be less than END; the arguments
     can be given in either order.  But most often the smaller argument
     is written first.

     If the text being copied has any text properties, these are copied
     into the string along with the characters they belong to.  *Note
     Text Properties::.  However, overlays (*note Overlays::.) in the
     buffer and their properties are ignored, not copied.

          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------
          This is the contents of buffer foo
          
          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------
          
          (buffer-substring 1 10)
          => "This is t"
          (buffer-substring (point-max) 10)
          => "he contents of buffer foo
          "

 - Function: buffer-substring-no-properties START END
     This is like `buffer-substring', except that it does not copy text
     properties, just the characters themselves.  *Note Text
     Properties::.  Here's an example of using this function to get a
     word to look up in an alist:

          (setq flammable
                (assoc (buffer-substring start end)
                       '(("wood" . t) ("paper" . t)
                         ("steel" . nil) ("asbestos" . nil))))

     If this were written using `buffer-substring' instead, it would not
     work reliably; any text properties that happened to be in the word
     copied from the buffer would make the comparisons fail.

 - Function: buffer-string
     This function returns the contents of the accessible portion of the
     current buffer as a string.  This is the portion between
     `(point-min)' and `(point-max)' (*note Narrowing::.).

          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------
          This is the contents of buffer foo
          
          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------
          
          (buffer-string)
               => "This is the contents of buffer foo
          "


File: elisp,  Node: Comparing Text,  Next: Insertion,  Prev: Buffer Contents,  Up: Text

Comparing Text
==============

   This function lets you compare portions of the text in a buffer,
without copying them into strings first.

 - Function: compare-buffer-substrings BUFFER1 START1 END1 BUFFER2
          START2 END2
     This function lets you compare two substrings of the same buffer
     or two different buffers.  The first three arguments specify one
     substring, giving a buffer and two positions within the buffer.
     The last three arguments specify the other substring in the same
     way.  You can use `nil' for BUFFER1, BUFFER2, or both to stand for
     the current buffer.

     The value is negative if the first substring is less, positive if
     the first is greater, and zero if they are equal.  The absolute
     value of the result is one plus the index of the first differing
     characters within the substrings.

     This function ignores case when comparing characters if
     `case-fold-search' is non-`nil'.  It always ignores text
     properties.

     Suppose the current buffer contains the text `foobarbar
     haha!rara!'; then in this example the two substrings are `rbar '
     and `rara!'.  The value is 2 because the first substring is greater
     at the second character.

          (compare-buffer-substring nil 6 11 nil 16 21)
               => 2


File: elisp,  Node: Insertion,  Next: Commands for Insertion,  Prev: Comparing Text,  Up: Text

Inserting Text
==============

   "Insertion" means adding new text to a buffer.  The inserted text
goes at point--between the character before point and the character
after point.

   Insertion relocates markers that point at positions after the
insertion point, so that they stay with the surrounding text (*note
Markers::.).  When a marker points at the place of insertion, insertion
normally doesn't relocate the marker, so that it points to the
beginning of the inserted text; however, certain special functions such
as `insert-before-markers' relocate such markers to point after the
inserted text.

   Some insertion functions leave point before the inserted text, while
other functions leave it after.  We call the former insertion "after
point" and the latter insertion "before point".

   Insertion functions signal an error if the current buffer is
read-only.

   These functions copy text characters from strings and buffers along
with their properties.  The inserted characters have exactly the same
properties as the characters they were copied from.  By contrast,
characters specified as separate arguments, not part of a string or
buffer, inherit their text properties from the neighboring text.

 - Function: insert &rest ARGS
     This function inserts the strings and/or characters ARGS into the
     current buffer, at point, moving point forward.  In other words, it
     inserts the text before point.  An error is signaled unless all
     ARGS are either strings or characters.  The value is `nil'.

 - Function: insert-before-markers &rest ARGS
     This function inserts the strings and/or characters ARGS into the
     current buffer, at point, moving point forward.  An error is
     signaled unless all ARGS are either strings or characters.  The
     value is `nil'.

     This function is unlike the other insertion functions in that it
     relocates markers initially pointing at the insertion point, to
     point after the inserted text.

 - Function: insert-char CHARACTER COUNT &optional INHERIT
     This function inserts COUNT instances of CHARACTER into the
     current buffer before point.  The argument COUNT must be a number,
     and CHARACTER must be a character.  The value is `nil'.

     If INHERIT is non-`nil', then the inserted characters inherit
     sticky text properties from the two characters before and after the
     insertion point.  *Note Sticky Properties::.

 - Function: insert-buffer-substring FROM-BUFFER-OR-NAME &optional
          START END
     This function inserts a portion of buffer FROM-BUFFER-OR-NAME
     (which must already exist) into the current buffer before point.
     The text inserted is the region from START and END.  (These
     arguments default to the beginning and end of the accessible
     portion of that buffer.)  This function returns `nil'.

     In this example, the form is executed with buffer `bar' as the
     current buffer.  We assume that buffer `bar' is initially empty.

          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------
          We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all
          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------
          
          (insert-buffer-substring "foo" 1 20)
               => nil
          
          ---------- Buffer: bar ----------
          We hold these truth-!-
          ---------- Buffer: bar ----------

   *Note Sticky Properties::, for other insertion functions that inherit
text properties from the nearby text in addition to inserting it.
Whitespace inserted by indentation functions also inherits text
properties.


File: elisp,  Node: Commands for Insertion,  Next: Deletion,  Prev: Insertion,  Up: Text

User-Level Insertion Commands
=============================

   This section describes higher-level commands for inserting text,
commands intended primarily for the user but useful also in Lisp
programs.

 - Command: insert-buffer FROM-BUFFER-OR-NAME
     This command inserts the entire contents of FROM-BUFFER-OR-NAME
     (which must exist) into the current buffer after point.  It leaves
     the mark after the inserted text.  The value is `nil'.

 - Command: self-insert-command COUNT
     This command inserts the last character typed; it does so COUNT
     times, before point, and returns `nil'.  Most printing characters
     are bound to this command.  In routine use, `self-insert-command'
     is the most frequently called function in Emacs, but programs
     rarely use it except to install it on a keymap.

     In an interactive call, COUNT is the numeric prefix argument.

     This command calls `auto-fill-function' whenever that is non-`nil'
     and the character inserted is a space or a newline (*note Auto
     Filling::.).

     This command performs abbrev expansion if Abbrev mode is enabled
     and the inserted character does not have word-constituent syntax.
     (*Note Abbrevs::, and *Note Syntax Class Table::.)

     This is also responsible for calling `blink-paren-function' when
     the inserted character has close parenthesis syntax (*note
     Blinking::.).

 - Command: newline &optional NUMBER-OF-NEWLINES
     This command inserts newlines into the current buffer before point.
     If NUMBER-OF-NEWLINES is supplied, that many newline characters
     are inserted.

     This function calls `auto-fill-function' if the current column
     number is greater than the value of `fill-column' and
     NUMBER-OF-NEWLINES is `nil'.  Typically what `auto-fill-function'
     does is insert a newline; thus, the overall result in this case is
     to insert two newlines at different places: one at point, and
     another earlier in the line.  `newline' does not auto-fill if
     NUMBER-OF-NEWLINES is non-`nil'.

     This command indents to the left margin if that is not zero.
     *Note Margins::.

     The value returned is `nil'.  In an interactive call, COUNT is the
     numeric prefix argument.

 - Command: split-line
     This command splits the current line, moving the portion of the
     line after point down vertically so that it is on the next line
     directly below where it was before.  Whitespace is inserted as
     needed at the beginning of the lower line, using the `indent-to'
     function.  `split-line' returns the position of point.

     Programs hardly ever use this function.

 - Variable: overwrite-mode
     This variable controls whether overwrite mode is in effect: a
     non-`nil' value enables the mode.  It is automatically made
     buffer-local when set in any fashion.


File: elisp,  Node: Deletion,  Next: User-Level Deletion,  Prev: Commands for Insertion,  Up: Text

Deleting Text
=============

   Deletion means removing part of the text in a buffer, without saving
it in the kill ring (*note The Kill Ring::.).  Deleted text can't be
yanked, but can be reinserted using the undo mechanism (*note Undo::.).
Some deletion functions do save text in the kill ring in some special
cases.

   All of the deletion functions operate on the current buffer, and all
return a value of `nil'.

 - Function: erase-buffer
     This function deletes the entire text of the current buffer,
     leaving it empty.  If the buffer is read-only, it signals a
     `buffer-read-only' error.  Otherwise, it deletes the text without
     asking for any confirmation.  It returns `nil'.

     Normally, deleting a large amount of text from a buffer inhibits
     further auto-saving of that buffer "because it has shrunk".
     However, `erase-buffer' does not do this, the idea being that the
     future text is not really related to the former text, and its size
     should not be compared with that of the former text.

 - Command: delete-region START END
     This command deletes the text in the current buffer in the region
     defined by START and END.  The value is `nil'.  If point was
     inside the deleted region, its value afterward is START.
     Otherwise, point relocates with the surrounding text, as markers
     do.

 - Command: delete-char COUNT &optional KILLP
     This command deletes COUNT characters directly after point, or
     before point if COUNT is negative.  If KILLP is non-`nil', then it
     saves the deleted characters in the kill ring.

     In an interactive call, COUNT is the numeric prefix argument, and
     KILLP is the unprocessed prefix argument.  Therefore, if a prefix
     argument is supplied, the text is saved in the kill ring.  If no
     prefix argument is supplied, then one character is deleted, but
     not saved in the kill ring.

     The value returned is always `nil'.

 - Command: delete-backward-char COUNT &optional KILLP
     This command deletes COUNT characters directly before point, or
     after point if COUNT is negative.  If KILLP is non-`nil', then it
     saves the deleted characters in the kill ring.

     In an interactive call, COUNT is the numeric prefix argument, and
     KILLP is the unprocessed prefix argument.  Therefore, if a prefix
     argument is supplied, the text is saved in the kill ring.  If no
     prefix argument is supplied, then one character is deleted, but
     not saved in the kill ring.

     The value returned is always `nil'.

 - Command: backward-delete-char-untabify COUNT &optional KILLP
     This command deletes COUNT characters backward, changing tabs into
     spaces.  When the next character to be deleted is a tab, it is
     first replaced with the proper number of spaces to preserve
     alignment and then one of those spaces is deleted instead of the
     tab.  If KILLP is non-`nil', then the command saves the deleted
     characters in the kill ring.

     Conversion of tabs to spaces happens only if COUNT is positive.
     If it is negative, exactly -COUNT characters after point are
     deleted.

     In an interactive call, COUNT is the numeric prefix argument, and
     KILLP is the unprocessed prefix argument.  Therefore, if a prefix
     argument is supplied, the text is saved in the kill ring.  If no
     prefix argument is supplied, then one character is deleted, but
     not saved in the kill ring.

     The value returned is always `nil'.


File: elisp,  Node: User-Level Deletion,  Next: The Kill Ring,  Prev: Deletion,  Up: Text

User-Level Deletion Commands
============================

   This section describes higher-level commands for deleting text,
commands intended primarily for the user but useful also in Lisp
programs.

 - Command: delete-horizontal-space
     This function deletes all spaces and tabs around point.  It returns
     `nil'.

     In the following examples, we call `delete-horizontal-space' four
     times, once on each line, with point between the second and third
     characters on the line each time.

          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------
          I -!-thought
          I -!-     thought
          We-!- thought
          Yo-!-u thought
          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------
          
          (delete-horizontal-space)   ; Four times.
               => nil
          
          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------
          Ithought
          Ithought
          Wethought
          You thought
          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------

 - Command: delete-indentation &optional JOIN-FOLLOWING-P
     This function joins the line point is on to the previous line,
     deleting any whitespace at the join and in some cases replacing it
     with one space.  If JOIN-FOLLOWING-P is non-`nil',
     `delete-indentation' joins this line to the following line
     instead.  The value is `nil'.

     If there is a fill prefix, and the second of the lines being joined
     starts with the prefix, then `delete-indentation' deletes the fill
     prefix before joining the lines.  *Note Margins::.

     In the example below, point is located on the line starting
     `events', and it makes no difference if there are trailing spaces
     in the preceding line.

          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------
          When in the course of human
          -!-    events, it becomes necessary
          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------
          
          (delete-indentation)
               => nil
          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------
          When in the course of human-!- events, it becomes necessary
          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------

     After the lines are joined, the function `fixup-whitespace' is
     responsible for deciding whether to leave a space at the junction.

 - Function: fixup-whitespace
     This function replaces all the white space surrounding point with
     either one space or no space, according to the context.  It
     returns `nil'.

     At the beginning or end of a line, the appropriate amount of space
     is none.  Before a character with close parenthesis syntax, or
     after a character with open parenthesis or expression-prefix
     syntax, no space is also appropriate.  Otherwise, one space is
     appropriate.  *Note Syntax Class Table::.

     In the example below, `fixup-whitespace' is called the first time
     with point before the word `spaces' in the first line.  For the
     second invocation, point is directly after the `('.

          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------
          This has too many     -!-spaces
          This has too many spaces at the start of (-!-   this list)
          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------

          (fixup-whitespace)
               => nil
          (fixup-whitespace)
               => nil

          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------
          This has too many spaces
          This has too many spaces at the start of (this list)
          ---------- Buffer: foo ----------

 - Command: just-one-space
     This command replaces any spaces and tabs around point with a
     single space.  It returns `nil'.

 - Command: delete-blank-lines
     This function deletes blank lines surrounding point.  If point is
     on a blank line with one or more blank lines before or after it,
     then all but one of them are deleted.  If point is on an isolated
     blank line, then it is deleted.  If point is on a nonblank line,
     the command deletes all blank lines following it.

     A blank line is defined as a line containing only tabs and spaces.

     `delete-blank-lines' returns `nil'.


File: elisp,  Node: The Kill Ring,  Next: Undo,  Prev: User-Level Deletion,  Up: Text

The Kill Ring
=============

   "Kill" functions delete text like the deletion functions, but save
it so that the user can reinsert it by "yanking".  Most of these
functions have `kill-' in their name.  By contrast, the functions whose
names start with `delete-' normally do not save text for yanking
(though they can still be undone); these are "deletion" functions.

   Most of the kill commands are primarily for interactive use, and are
not described here.  What we do describe are the functions provided for
use in writing such commands.  You can use these functions to write
commands for killing text.  When you need to delete text for internal
purposes within a Lisp function, you should normally use deletion
functions, so as not to disturb the kill ring contents.  *Note
Deletion::.

   Killed text is saved for later yanking in the "kill ring".  This is
a list that holds a number of recent kills, not just the last text
kill.  We call this a "ring" because yanking treats it as having
elements in a cyclic order.  The list is kept in the variable
`kill-ring', and can be operated on with the usual functions for lists;
there are also specialized functions, described in this section, that
treat it as a ring.

   Some people think this use of the word "kill" is unfortunate, since
it refers to operations that specifically *do not* destroy the entities
"killed".  This is in sharp contrast to ordinary life, in which death
is permanent and "killed" entities do not come back to life.
Therefore, other metaphors have been proposed.  For example, the term
"cut ring" makes sense to people who, in pre-computer days, used
scissors and paste to cut up and rearrange manuscripts.  However, it
would be difficult to change the terminology now.

* Menu:

* Kill Ring Concepts::     What text looks like in the kill ring.
* Kill Functions::         Functions that kill text.
* Yank Commands::          Commands that access the kill ring.
* Low-Level Kill Ring::	   Functions and variables for kill ring access.
* Internals of Kill Ring:: Variables that hold kill-ring data.


File: elisp,  Node: Kill Ring Concepts,  Next: Kill Functions,  Up: The Kill Ring

Kill Ring Concepts
------------------

   The kill ring records killed text as strings in a list, most recent
first.  A short kill ring, for example, might look like this:

     ("some text" "a different piece of text" "even older text")

When the list reaches `kill-ring-max' entries in length, adding a new
entry automatically deletes the last entry.

   When kill commands are interwoven with other commands, each kill
command makes a new entry in the kill ring.  Multiple kill commands in
succession build up a single entry in the kill ring, which would be
yanked as a unit; the second and subsequent consecutive kill commands
add text to the entry made by the first one.

   For yanking, one entry in the kill ring is designated the "front" of
the ring.  Some yank commands "rotate" the ring by designating a
different element as the "front."  But this virtual rotation doesn't
change the list itself--the most recent entry always comes first in the
list.


File: elisp,  Node: Kill Functions,  Next: Yank Commands,  Prev: Kill Ring Concepts,  Up: The Kill Ring

Functions for Killing
---------------------

   `kill-region' is the usual subroutine for killing text.  Any command
that calls this function is a "kill command" (and should probably have
`kill' in its name).  `kill-region' puts the newly killed text in a new
element at the beginning of the kill ring or adds it to the most recent
element.  It uses the `last-command' variable to determine whether the
previous command was a kill command, and if so appends the killed text
to the most recent entry.

 - Command: kill-region START END
     This function kills the text in the region defined by START and
     END.  The text is deleted but saved in the kill ring, along with
     its text properties.  The value is always `nil'.

     In an interactive call, START and END are point and the mark.

     If the buffer is read-only, `kill-region' modifies the kill ring
     just the same, then signals an error without modifying the buffer.
     This is convenient because it lets the user use all the kill
     commands to copy text into the kill ring from a read-only buffer.

 - Command: copy-region-as-kill START END
     This command saves the region defined by START and END on the kill
     ring (including text properties), but does not delete the text
     from the buffer.  It returns `nil'.  It also indicates the extent
     of the text copied by moving the cursor momentarily, or by
     displaying a message in the echo area.

     The command does not set `this-command' to `kill-region', so a
     subsequent kill command does not append to the same kill ring
     entry.

     Don't call `copy-region-as-kill' in Lisp programs unless you aim to
     support Emacs 18.  For Emacs 19, it is better to use `kill-new' or
     `kill-append' instead.  *Note Low-Level Kill Ring::.


File: elisp,  Node: Yank Commands,  Next: Low-Level Kill Ring,  Prev: Kill Functions,  Up: The Kill Ring

Functions for Yanking
---------------------

   "Yanking" means reinserting an entry of previously killed text from
the kill ring.  The text properties are copied too.

 - Command: yank &optional ARG
     This command inserts before point the text in the first entry in
     the kill ring.  It positions the mark at the beginning of that
     text, and point at the end.

     If ARG is a list (which occurs interactively when the user types
     `C-u' with no digits), then `yank' inserts the text as described
     above, but puts point before the yanked text and puts the mark
     after it.

     If ARG is a number, then `yank' inserts the ARGth most recently
     killed text--the ARGth element of the kill ring list.

     `yank' does not alter the contents of the kill ring or rotate it.
     It returns `nil'.

 - Command: yank-pop ARG
     This command replaces the just-yanked entry from the kill ring
     with a different entry from the kill ring.

     This is allowed only immediately after a `yank' or another
     `yank-pop'.  At such a time, the region contains text that was just
     inserted by yanking.  `yank-pop' deletes that text and inserts in
     its place a different piece of killed text.  It does not add the
     deleted text to the kill ring, since it is already in the kill
     ring somewhere.

     If ARG is `nil', then the replacement text is the previous element
     of the kill ring.  If ARG is numeric, the replacement is the ARGth
     previous kill.  If ARG is negative, a more recent kill is the
     replacement.

     The sequence of kills in the kill ring wraps around, so that after
     the oldest one comes the newest one, and before the newest one
     goes the oldest.

     The value is always `nil'.


File: elisp,  Node: Low-Level Kill Ring,  Next: Internals of Kill Ring,  Prev: Yank Commands,  Up: The Kill Ring

Low-Level Kill Ring
-------------------

   These functions and variables provide access to the kill ring at a
lower level, but still convenient for use in Lisp programs.  They take
care of interaction with X Window selections.  They do not exist in
Emacs version 18.

 - Function: current-kill N &optional DO-NOT-MOVE
     The function `current-kill' rotates the yanking pointer which
     designates the "front" of the kill ring by N places (from newer
     kills to older ones), and returns the text at that place in the
     ring.

     If the optional second argument DO-NOT-MOVE is non-`nil', then
     `current-kill' doesn't alter the yanking pointer; it just returns
     the Nth kill, counting from the current yanking pointer.

     If N is zero, indicating a request for the latest kill,
     `current-kill' calls the value of `interprogram-paste-function'
     (documented below) before consulting the kill ring.

 - Function: kill-new STRING
     This function puts the text STRING into the kill ring as a new
     entry at the front of the ring.  It discards the oldest entry if
     appropriate.  It also invokes the value of
     `interprogram-cut-function' (see below).

 - Function: kill-append STRING BEFORE-P
     This function appends the text STRING to the first entry in the
     kill ring.  Normally STRING goes at the end of the entry, but if
     BEFORE-P is non-`nil', it goes at the beginning.  This function
     also invokes the value of `interprogram-cut-function' (see below).

 - Variable: interprogram-paste-function
     This variable provides a way of transferring killed text from other
     programs, when you are using a window system.  Its value should be
     `nil' or a function of no arguments.

     If the value is a function, `current-kill' calls it to get the
     "most recent kill".  If the function returns a non-`nil' value,
     then that value is used as the "most recent kill".  If it returns
     `nil', then the first element of `kill-ring' is used.

     The normal use of this hook is to get the X server's primary
     selection as the most recent kill, even if the selection belongs
     to another X client.  *Note X Selections::.

 - Variable: interprogram-cut-function
     This variable provides a way of communicating killed text to other
     programs, when you are using a window system.  Its value should be
     `nil' or a function of one argument.

     If the value is a function, `kill-new' and `kill-append' call it
     with the new first element of the kill ring as an argument.

     The normal use of this hook is to set the X server's primary
     selection to the newly killed text.


File: elisp,  Node: Internals of Kill Ring,  Prev: Low-Level Kill Ring,  Up: The Kill Ring

Internals of the Kill Ring
--------------------------

   The variable `kill-ring' holds the kill ring contents, in the form
of a list of strings.  The most recent kill is always at the front of
the list.

   The `kill-ring-yank-pointer' variable points to a link in the kill
ring list, whose CAR is the text to yank next.  We say it identifies
the "front" of the ring.  Moving `kill-ring-yank-pointer' to a
different link is called "rotating the kill ring".  We call the kill
ring a "ring" because the functions that move the yank pointer wrap
around from the end of the list to the beginning, or vice-versa.
Rotation of the kill ring is virtual; it does not change the value of
`kill-ring'.

   Both `kill-ring' and `kill-ring-yank-pointer' are Lisp variables
whose values are normally lists.  The word "pointer" in the name of the
`kill-ring-yank-pointer' indicates that the variable's purpose is to
identify one element of the list for use by the next yank command.

   The value of `kill-ring-yank-pointer' is always `eq' to one of the
links in the kill ring list.  The element it identifies is the CAR of
that link.  Kill commands, which change the kill ring, also set this
variable to the value of `kill-ring'.  The effect is to rotate the ring
so that the newly killed text is at the front.

   Here is a diagram that shows the variable `kill-ring-yank-pointer'
pointing to the second entry in the kill ring `("some text" "a
different piece of text" "yet older text")'.

     kill-ring       kill-ring-yank-pointer
       |               |
       |     ___ ___    --->  ___ ___      ___ ___
        --> |___|___|------> |___|___|--> |___|___|--> nil
              |                |            |
              |                |            |
              |                |             -->"yet older text"
              |                |
              |                 --> "a different piece of text"
              |
               --> "some text"

This state of affairs might occur after `C-y' (`yank') immediately
followed by `M-y' (`yank-pop').

 - Variable: kill-ring
     This variable holds the list of killed text sequences, most
     recently killed first.

 - Variable: kill-ring-yank-pointer
     This variable's value indicates which element of the kill ring is
     at the "front" of the ring for yanking.  More precisely, the value
     is a tail of the value of `kill-ring', and its CAR is the kill
     string that `C-y' should yank.

 - User Option: kill-ring-max
     The value of this variable is the maximum length to which the kill
     ring can grow, before elements are thrown away at the end.  The
     default value for `kill-ring-max' is 30.


File: elisp,  Node: Undo,  Next: Maintaining Undo,  Prev: The Kill Ring,  Up: Text

Undo
====

   Most buffers have an "undo list", which records all changes made to
the buffer's text so that they can be undone.  (The buffers that don't
have one are usually special-purpose buffers for which Emacs assumes
that undoing is not useful.)  All the primitives that modify the text
in the buffer automatically add elements to the front of the undo list,
which is in the variable `buffer-undo-list'.

 - Variable: buffer-undo-list
     This variable's value is the undo list of the current buffer.  A
     value of `t' disables the recording of undo information.

   Here are the kinds of elements an undo list can have:

`INTEGER'
     This kind of element records a previous value of point.  Ordinary
     cursor motion does not get any sort of undo record, but deletion
     commands use these entries to record where point was before the
     command.

`(BEG . END)'
     This kind of element indicates how to delete text that was
     inserted.  Upon insertion, the text occupied the range BEG-END in
     the buffer.

`(TEXT . POSITION)'
     This kind of element indicates how to reinsert text that was
     deleted.  The deleted text itself is the string TEXT.  The place to
     reinsert it is `(abs POSITION)'.

`(t HIGH . LOW)'
     This kind of element indicates that an unmodified buffer became
     modified.  The elements HIGH and LOW are two integers, each
     recording 16 bits of the visited file's modification time as of
     when it was previously visited or saved.  `primitive-undo' uses
     those values to determine whether to mark the buffer as unmodified
     once again; it does so only if the file's modification time
     matches those numbers.

`(nil PROPERTY VALUE BEG . END)'
     This kind of element records a change in a text property.  Here's
     how you might undo the change:

          (put-text-property BEG END PROPERTY VALUE)

`(MARKER . ADJUSTMENT)'
     This kind of element records the fact that the marker MARKER was
     relocated due to deletion of surrounding text, and that it moved
     ADJUSTMENT character positions.  Undoing this element moves MARKER
     - ADJUSTMENT characters.

`POSITION'
     This element indicates where point was at an earlier time.
     Undoing this element sets point to POSITION.  Deletion normally
     creates an element of this kind as well as a reinsertion element.

`nil'
     This element is a boundary.  The elements between two boundaries
     are called a "change group"; normally, each change group
     corresponds to one keyboard command, and undo commands normally
     undo an entire group as a unit.

 - Function: undo-boundary
     This function places a boundary element in the undo list.  The undo
     command stops at such a boundary, and successive undo commands undo
     to earlier and earlier boundaries.  This function returns `nil'.

     The editor command loop automatically creates an undo boundary
     before each key sequence is executed.  Thus, each undo normally
     undoes the effects of one command.  Self-inserting input
     characters are an exception.  The command loop makes a boundary
     for the first such character; the next 19 consecutive
     self-inserting input characters do not make boundaries, and then
     the 20th does, and so on as long as self-inserting characters
     continue.

     All buffer modifications add a boundary whenever the previous
     undoable change was made in some other buffer.  This way, a
     command that modifies several buffers makes a boundary in each
     buffer it changes.

     Calling this function explicitly is useful for splitting the
     effects of a command into more than one unit.  For example,
     `query-replace' calls `undo-boundary' after each replacement, so
     that the user can undo individual replacements one by one.

 - Function: primitive-undo COUNT LIST
     This is the basic function for undoing elements of an undo list.
     It undoes the first COUNT elements of LIST, returning the rest of
     LIST.  You could write this function in Lisp, but it is convenient
     to have it in C.

     `primitive-undo' adds elements to the buffer's undo list when it
     changes the buffer.  Undo commands avoid confusion by saving the
     undo list value at the beginning of a sequence of undo operations.
     Then the undo operations use and update the saved value.  The new
     elements added by undoing are not part of this saved value, so
     they don't interfere with continuing to undo.


File: elisp,  Node: Maintaining Undo,  Next: Filling,  Prev: Undo,  Up: Text

Maintaining Undo Lists
======================

   This section describes how to enable and disable undo information for
a given buffer.  It also explains how the undo list is truncated
automatically so it doesn't get too big.

   Recording of undo information in a newly created buffer is normally
enabled to start with; but if the buffer name starts with a space, the
undo recording is initially disabled.  You can explicitly enable or
disable undo recording with the following two functions, or by setting
`buffer-undo-list' yourself.

 - Command: buffer-enable-undo &optional BUFFER-OR-NAME
     This command enables recording undo information for buffer
     BUFFER-OR-NAME, so that subsequent changes can be undone.  If no
     argument is supplied, then the current buffer is used.  This
     function does nothing if undo recording is already enabled in the
     buffer.  It returns `nil'.

     In an interactive call, BUFFER-OR-NAME is the current buffer.  You
     cannot specify any other buffer.

 - Function: buffer-disable-undo &optional BUFFER
 - Function: buffer-flush-undo &optional BUFFER
     This function discards the undo list of BUFFER, and disables
     further recording of undo information.  As a result, it is no
     longer possible to undo either previous changes or any subsequent
     changes.  If the undo list of BUFFER is already disabled, this
     function has no effect.

     This function returns `nil'.  It cannot be called interactively.

     The name `buffer-flush-undo' is not considered obsolete, but the
     preferred name `buffer-disable-undo' is new as of Emacs versions
     19.

   As editing continues, undo lists get longer and longer.  To prevent
them from using up all available memory space, garbage collection trims
them back to size limits you can set.  (For this purpose, the "size" of
an undo list measures the cons cells that make up the list, plus the
strings of deleted text.)  Two variables control the range of acceptable
sizes: `undo-limit' and `undo-strong-limit'.

 - Variable: undo-limit
     This is the soft limit for the acceptable size of an undo list.
     The change group at which this size is exceeded is the last one
     kept.

 - Variable: undo-strong-limit
     This is the upper limit for the acceptable size of an undo list.
     The change group at which this size is exceeded is discarded
     itself (along with all older change groups).  There is one
     exception: the very latest change group is never discarded no
     matter how big it is.


File: elisp,  Node: Filling,  Next: Margins,  Prev: Maintaining Undo,  Up: Text

Filling
=======

   "Filling" means adjusting the lengths of lines (by moving the line
breaks) so that they are nearly (but no greater than) a specified
maximum width.  Additionally, lines can be "justified", which means
inserting spaces to make the left and/or right margins line up
precisely.  The width is controlled by the variable `fill-column'.  For
ease of reading, lines should be no longer than 70 or so columns.

   You can use Auto Fill mode (*note Auto Filling::.) to fill text
automatically as you insert it, but changes to existing text may leave
it improperly filled.  Then you must fill the text explicitly.

   Most of the commands in this section return values that are not
meaningful.  All the functions that do filling take note of the current
left margin, current right margin, and current justification style
(*note Margins::.).  If the current justification style is `none', the
filling functions don't actually do anything.

   Several of the filling functions have an argument JUSTIFY.  If it is
non-`nil', that requests some kind of justification.  It can be `left',
`right', `full', or `center', to request a specific style of
justification.  If it is `t', that means to use the current
justification style for this part of the text (see
`current-justification', below).

   When you call the filling functions interactively, using a prefix
argument implies the value `full' for JUSTIFY.

 - Command: fill-paragraph JUSTIFY
     This command fills the paragraph at or after point.  If JUSTIFY is
     non-`nil', each line is justified as well.  It uses the ordinary
     paragraph motion commands to find paragraph boundaries.  *Note
     Paragraphs: (emacs)Paragraphs.

 - Command: fill-region START END &optional JUSTIFY
     This command fills each of the paragraphs in the region from START
     to END.  It justifies as well if JUSTIFY is non-`nil'.

     The variable `paragraph-separate' controls how to distinguish
     paragraphs.  *Note Standard Regexps::.

 - Command: fill-individual-paragraphs START END &optional JUSTIFY
          MAIL-FLAG
     This command fills each paragraph in the region according to its
     individual fill prefix.  Thus, if the lines of a paragraph were
     indented with spaces, the filled paragraph will remain indented in
     the same fashion.

     The first two arguments, START and END, are the beginning and end
     of the region to be filled.  The third and fourth arguments,
     JUSTIFY and MAIL-FLAG, are optional.  If JUSTIFY is non-`nil', the
     paragraphs are justified as well as filled.  If MAIL-FLAG is
     non-`nil', it means the function is operating on a mail message
     and therefore should not fill the header lines.

     Ordinarily, `fill-individual-paragraphs' regards each change in
     indentation as starting a new paragraph.  If
     `fill-individual-varying-indent' is non-`nil', then only separator
     lines separate paragraphs.  That mode can handle indented
     paragraphs with additional indentation on the first line.

 - User Option: fill-individual-varying-indent
     This variable alters the action of `fill-individual-paragraphs' as
     described above.

 - Command: fill-region-as-paragraph START END &optional JUSTIFY
     This command considers a region of text as a paragraph and fills
     it.  If the region was made up of many paragraphs, the blank lines
     between paragraphs are removed.  This function justifies as well
     as filling when JUSTIFY is non-`nil'.

     In an interactive call, any prefix argument requests justification.

     In Adaptive Fill mode, which is enabled by default,
     `fill-region-as-paragraph' on an indented paragraph when there is
     no fill prefix uses the indentation of the second line of the
     paragraph as the fill prefix.

 - Command: justify-current-line HOW EOP NOSQUEEZE
     This command inserts spaces between the words of the current line
     so that the line ends exactly at `fill-column'.  It returns `nil'.

     The argument HOW, if non-`nil' specifies explicitly the style of
     justification.  It can be `left', `right', `full', `center', or
     `none'.  If it is `t', that means to do follow specified
     justification style (see `current-justification', below).  `nil'
     means to do full justification.

     If EOP is non-`nil', that means do left-justification when
     `current-justification' specifies full justification.  This is used
     for the last line of a paragraph; even if the paragraph as a whole
     is fully justified, the last line should not be.

     If NOSQUEEZE is non-`nil', that means do not change interior
     whitespace.

 - User Option: default-justification
     This variable's value specifies the style of justification to use
     for text that doesn't specify a style with a text property.  The
     possible values are `left', `right', `full', `center', or `none'.
     The default value is `left'.

 - Function: current-justification
     This function returns the proper justification style to use for
     filling the text around point.

 - Variable: fill-paragraph-function
     This variable provides a way for major modes to override the
     filling of paragraphs.  If the value is non-`nil',
     `fill-paragraph' calls this function to do the work.  If the
     function returns a non-`nil' value, `fill-paragraph' assumes the
     job is done, and immediately returns that value.

     The usual use of this feature is to fill comments in programming
     language modes.  If the function needs to fill a paragraph in the
     usual way, it can do so as follows:

          (let ((fill-paragraph-function nil))
            (fill-paragraph arg))

 - Variable: use-hard-newlines
     If this variable is non-`nil', the filling functions do not delete
     newlines that have the `hard' text property.  These "hard
     newlines" act as paragraph separators.

