README for Edition 2.4 of the Emacs Lisp Reference Manual.

* This directory contains the texinfo source files for the Reference
Manual, make-permuted-index, and the latest version of texinfo.tex,
which handles forms that cannot be handled by the older versions of
texinfo.tex.  Also, it contains makeinfo.c.

* Report Lisp Manual bugs to bug-lisp-manual@prep.ai.mit.edu.  We
don't read these bug reports until it's time for a new edition.  To
report other Emacs bugs, use bug-gnu-emacs@prep.ai.mit.edu.
To ask questions, use the newsgroup gnu.emacs.help.

* The Emacs Lisp Reference Manual is quite large.  It totals around
700 pages in smallbook format; the info files total almost two
megabytes.

* You can format this manual either for Info or for printing hardcopy
using TeX.  

* You can buy nicely printed copies from the Free Software Foundation.
For info, send mail to gnu@prep.ai.mit.edu or phone 617-542-5942.
Buying a manual from the Free Software Foundation helps support our
GNU development work.

** This distribution contains a Makefile that you can use with GNU Make.
Otherwise, here are detailed instructions:

** HARDCOPY: A copy of the version of `texinfo.tex' that formats this
manual is included in this distribution.

The master file for formatting this manual for Tex is called
`elisp.texi'.  It contains @include commands to include all the
chapters that make up the manual.  In addition, `elisp.texi' has
the title page in a new format designed by Karl Berry, using the
@titlespec command.

To create a DVI file with a sorted index, execute the following
commands in the shell:

% make index.texi
% make elisp.dvi

*** To create a DVI file with a permuted index, you may experiment
with `make-permuted-index'.  

** INFO: A copy of makeinfo.c that will format this manual for Info is
included in this distribution.  This program is written in C and can
be used separately from Emacs.  `makeinfo' produces much better error
messages than the old `texinfo-format-buffer'.  You can run `makeinfo'
it on the `elisp.texi' file.
